Hello and welcome to the panel
“The Future of European Digital Policy”
My name is Klára Votavová
I’m a member of
the Czech Pirate Party
and I will guide you through this panel
Before we start,
I would like to ask you to participate
in a poll that we just sent you
We will reflect on your answers
at the end of our discussion
This December is an exciting month
for digital regulation
because it is when the European
Commission unveils
some highly anticipated pieces
of digital legislation.
Specifically, on 15th December
the Commission should unveil a package
containing two crucial proposals.
The first of them is, of course,
the Digital Services Act
which should set responsibilities
of online platforms
regarding the content
that they carry.
The second act in this package is
the Digital Markets Act
which should clarify rules
for very large platforms,
such as Facebook or Amazon,
which effectively regulate access
to certain segments of the internet.
This week, the Commission also unveiled
the so-called European
Democracy Action Plan
which among other things
tackles disinformation
and online political advertising
And last but not least,
in March the Commission
is also expected
to propose a regulation on some
applications of artificial intelligence
In short,
we live in exciting times
for digital regulation
and I am really looking forward
to discussing it with you.
Without further ado,
let me introduce our four
honorable panelists.
The first of them is, of course,
George Tilesch
that you have maybe
already listened to
in the dialogue with Aneta Zachová
George consults on AI governance
among other places in the Silicon Valley
And he has also co-authored a book,
published this year called
“Between Brains”
Welcome George
Our second guest is Eliška Pirková,
a lawyer at the Access Now NGO
who focuses on freedom of speech
on the internet
and liability of platforms
for content
Welcome Eliška
The third panelist is the vice president
of the European Parliament,
the Pirate MEP Marcel Kolaja.
Marcel focuses both on the regulation
of artificial intelligence
and on platform liability
in the European Parliament.
And last but not least,
I’m glad to welcome Pavel Havlíček
Analyst at the Association for
International Affairs
who is focused mainly on
online political advertising
So welcome to all of you
And now let us jump right
into the first topic
which is the upcoming
EU digital regulation.
My first question goes to Marcel
We know that you have been dealing
with some recent EU legislation
that is relevant to platform's
liability for content
including the terrorist
content regulation
and also passively the copyright
directive of the last year
What are the key pitfalls of these
specific pieces of legislation?
Hello everybody
And I apologise that you
cannot see my video
I cannot see yours either.
Now to your question
I mean, if you have two hours to listen
then I can go through every single
concern that I have
but I’ll try to make it short
and maybe the most
overarching principle
that we can see both
in the terrorism regulation
but also in the copyright directive
and in terms of my concern
is that
I sometimes have the feeling
that the legislation has been created
only with the largest platforms
in mind
And
I also need to say that I followed
the implementation
of the copyright directive
which is now in the member states
very closely
I questioned the Commission on
on how
how France is approaching
the legislation
and it looks like that the path
that France has chosen
when it comes to protection of users,
and therefore citizens,
and their fundamental rights
is insufficient
And I think that these two things
are very much connected
If you think about the internet
like it's only basically
Facebook and YouTube
it might be easy to, you know,
draft some legislation
and it might have been easy to think
"Well, yeah, OK, so we have these platforms here
where people share content”
and it would be fairly easy, you know,
to target them
as kind of like gatekeepers
to information of that
If there is something illegal,
they can easily remove it
But the problem is that
first it creates the environment for
private law enforcement,
where these large platforms
would decide
on what is legal and
what is illegal
And as much as we've been hearing
very often recently that
what is illegal offline should
also be illegal online
I also need to say
that it’s very important to
pay attention to
the opposite principle
that what is legal offline
should also be legal online
and for that we need protection
And we  especially need protection
for the freedom of speech
and if we allow these large companies
to do policing,
to decide what is legal
and what is not
then we have basically
no protections
And if we put them in a place
where they are even liable for
the content that is shared
on these platforms
that is even worse,
because then they are simply
incentivised to remove
anything that gets even close,
just close,
to maybe be illegal
because it's much safer for them
to remove such content
and not to face any kind of sanctions.
So that is one problem.
Another problem is that
if you look at tetherism regulation,
the removal of terrorist
content online
One of the biggest issues
where the Council
and the Parliament cannot
really agree on
is how to deal with cross-border
removal orders
So imagine
You know
The purpose of this legislation is
to remove terrorism content
from the internet
and now imagine that you get
a removal order
from some competent authority
from Hungary
where all of us know that
we've been having issues
with the rule of law
and now imagine that
the government will start using
this legislation for censorship reasons,
that they will try to
censor opposition
They could say that the Greens,
for instance,
are Green terrorists
and they start removing
their content
Now that is an issue per se
But now imagine that they would be able
to do it across all Europe
so with the principle of
cross-border removal
when we have majority of
these big platforms,
for instance,
in Ireland established
and the Hungarian authority can request
a company established in Ireland
to remove content Europe-wide
then we are basically creating this
race to the bottom principle that
if you target any-
if you want to remove some content
and you target
you target a member state with
the lowest level of
protection for fundamental rights,
for freedom of speech,
you can get that content removed
for the whole Europe.
Now I would like to turn to
Eliška Pirková
who made an excellent video for us
on the Digital Services Act
that Marcel also mentioned.
Can you please shortly tell us
why the Digital Services Act
is so important
and what are your key recommendations
for how it should look like?
Thank you very much
and hello everyone
it’s a great pleasure to be here.
Just to quickly refresh
the memory of everyone,
my name is Eliška,
I work as a Europe Policy Analyst
at Access Now
in our Brussels team
and I lead our work on content
governance issues
and specifically on
Digital Services Act
and partially touching
on Digital Markets Act,
which is the second law which
will be coming out of this
big legislative package.
And I think that this question
nicely bridges
to those points that actually Marcel
raised during his contribution
so why DSA is important
it’s precisely due to those
regulatory trends
that we were witnessing in Europe
for the last five years
or even longer
whether at EU level
or national level
But we often encounter rather hastily
drafted regulatory responses
to certain categories of illegal
or potentially harmful content,
ultimately shifts state obligations
and responsibilities
from states on private actors
Private actors then
are responsible for
balancing [inaudible]
and financial rights,
they are hardly subjected
to any public scrutiny,
transparency and
judicial oversight,
which is another major issue
within the online terrorist
content regulation,
is lacking behind.
This is then directly connected
to the fact that
users usually don’t have easy access
to effective remedy,
appealment mechanism
or other channels and options
to actually challenge
those decisions.
On one hand in the past,
the EU tried to sort it out through
creating different
co-regulatory measures,
we saw Code of Conduct
and Code of Practices,
but again they often served
as pushing companies
to the corner and remove
the content faster
And trying to make them
comply this way,
using legally binding regulations
as sort of a tract
If you do not fulfill
these requirements,
then we will regulate you.
Now DSA is important
because nothing needs to be
probably clearly set,
and we need systemic regulation
of online gatekeepers
or large platforms
And we finally need to make the
regulation working in the right way
We need to careful
when crafting DSA
that we won't reinforce the already
existing dominance
of online gatekeepers
and we need to acknowledge that there
are smaller actors and players
who can be negatively impacted by
such regulatory measures
But the systemic regulation
that will actually harmonise the
regulatory landscape
across the EU
is absolutely necessary
at this point.
DSA as the law from this package
will specifically look at
the issues of
something we call
content governance
so how the illegal content
is actually
going to be regulated in the EU,
It will hopefully preserve
the liability model
as it currently exists under
the E-Commerce directives,
so under the article 14 of
the E-commerce directive,
which establishes the exact reels for
conditional models of liability
There are other principles within
the current E-commerce directive
that should be upheld by DSA,
such as promotion of
general monitoring,
and I don’t want to go into details
and discuss all these
legal principles
but I’m happy to answer
all the questions
that will follow afterwards.
But what we specifically hopefully
establish is that
finally users fundamental rights,
users' empowerment
and users' control
over their personal data
and over information they seek
and they impart
will actually return back
to the user
it will enable proper
public oversight
where actually authorities
can really follow
whether companies do comply with
the new procedures required
and requirements
that these laws will establish,
given that it will be
clearly determined
what the states are supposed to do
and what is the role of
private platforms
So we will finally reinforce
something we call
the principle of legal certainty
which is the main precondition
and integral part of law
and finally it will also hopefully
enable something we call
the Research Data Access Framework
So we often advocate
for research-based
and evidence-based policy making
so we can actually avoid haste
and draft regulations
that we've assessed to this day,
that put the emphasis on a quick
and fast removal of the content
without properly understanding
what platforms do
with that content,
how they moderate,
whether automated decision-making
processes are being involved,
we know that they are obviously,
but what decisions were done
purely by the automation
and when the human in the loop
is being kept
that's not clearly stated
elsewhere
And it will also reinforce
something we call
meaningful transparency,
that will enable all of this.
Right now transparency reports
are more,
you know, it’s a voluntary commitment
of platforms
to publish those
but I think it’s time we cannot
simply treat transparency
as some form of generosity
or luxury
that the platforms
occasionally express.
They should be actually mandatory
obligations for platforms to do so
due to today dominance
and the impact
on the public and democratic
discourse they have
DSA hopefully together with
DMA will actually do
much more than this
that I've just stated
There is a whole question
about what kind of oversight
we actually will have
and the DSA cut to the power.
It will probably also harmonise
the response to the
how we actually currently
regulate illegal content
through harmonisation of
something we call
Notice and Action Procedures,
so that these adequate response
mechanisms are perhaps tailored
to the particular type of content
they’re supposed to tackle
and that they enable and empower
users to report that content
so they will actually be
easily accessible
and they won’t nudge users away
from even, you know,
taking care of what kind of platform
and online environment
they coexist with
other communities.
Thank you Eliška
Maybe I would quickly
jump back to Marcel,
if you would like to react on
Eliška’s comments on the DSA
But quickly
Yeah, thanks
I don’t necessarily need to,
you know, react
but what I would like to
underline is that
that
there are these three very
important principles
of the E-commerce directive
and we should make sure
that we do not change them
in the new legislation
which is also what the
Commission promised to do
and the Digital Services Act is
going to be publicly published,
according to the Commission,
on the 15th December
so I’m very much looking forward to see
what the Commission has drafted,
but these 3 principles of No General
Monitoring Obligation,
of the Liability Exception
and of the Country of Origin
is definitely that we need to
make sure that are there
and then we need to
we need to have protections
for fundamental rights online,
we need to have a
Notice and Action System
that will enable removals
of illegal content
but also has exactly these protections
of fundamental rights
And in the Digital Markets Act,
which is part of the package
of the Digital Services Act,
we need to make sure that
we foster innovation
by making services interoperable
so that, you know, large platforms,
like Facebook for instance,
would have the obligation
to enable
interconnectivity with
smaller platforms,
with community-based free software
like MastaDone for instance,
the chat systems could be
interoperable
so that users can connect to
users of another platform
while not being in the need of having
seven different accounts.
Thank you very much for
these remarks Marcel
We may get back to the
Digital Services Act again
but now I would like to turn to
another piece of legislation
The European Democracy Action Plan
which was actually released
only the past week
and which deals with disinformation
and also political advertising
And here I would like to ask
Pavel Havlíček
if he would like to chip in
and maybe tell us what are
his initial thoughts
on this piece of legislation
or actually it’s a non-regulatory piece
but nevertheless,
action plan
Thank you so much Klára
Thank you so much for having me
My name is Pavel Havlíček
and I work for the Association
for International Affairs
and if you are fans as well
You also saw my video on the topic
of EU’s Action Plan for Democracy
which was just presented
on Thursday.
I believe that this is
the right step forward,
I will try to explain why
this is innovative
and brings some new elements and
you know, especially in the domains
that you already hinted on
yourself
Digital political advertising
but also other issues related
to disinformation
So if we start maybe
with the broader picture
then I try to also
describing the video
You know,
there’s the law,
you know,
in the Democracy Action Plan,
I recommend you to have a look
because
you have quite a
lengthy description
on what the EU is really
planning to do
in terms of three major pillars
of the actual plan
which are elections,
these are the fight disinformation
and finally also
issues of media,
media plurality
and also basically,
you know, use,
interaction with media,
support the media
and so on and so forth
So these are the three bigger
categories, you know
If we have a look especially
at the disinformation [inaudible],
I understood that this section
should also be about
putting into wide context
what we are having now,
which is not only the second biggest
worldwide pandemic
but also infodemics
and we are also having huge waves
of disinformation campaigns
and this is something that
the action plan
strategic the vision of the EU,
of the European Commission
to tackle disinformation
is also basically
responding to it.
It is going along the lines of
three different levels.
First is the international or
foreign interference level,
which is basically using
quite strong language
on basically naming and shaming
the third parties
especially Russia and China
that have engaged in massive
disinformation operations,
as we know from the past
and elsewhere from Europe
and the world.
So
So this is the first level,
you know,
and here the Action Plan
actually comes up with
not only strong language and
singling out these [inaudible]
but also potentially
introducing sanctions,
a sanction mechanism
to really increase the cost of
engaging in similar operations.
So this is quite significant,
this is something new
that Czech EU Commissioner
Věra Jourová came up with
She has been quite consistent on
this foreign interference
and very vocal about refusing this,
so the first level.
Then if we speak about the
so-called like domestic
that the European, Czech,
Belgium, and elsewhere
domestic level of the
disinformation debate
Here you have already spoken
about the issue of
digital political advertising
This is obviously going also
in the direction of elections,
but it also trying to tackle
the domestic manipulation
from either political parties
or also third parties engaged
in political campaigns,
in political kind of debates
and public discourse in general,
you know,
and here the Commission is
proposing to move on
from the current model
of self-regulation
that Eliška already hinted on,
by which the Commission initially
tries to persecute,
from my prospective,
own sources of its own responsibility
to the big platforms
This is not a sustainable model
as we have seen, you know,
and there were numerous
basically reports
showing why this has failed
including what we have produced
on the level of member
states in Czechia
with our team
but also with colleagues from
The Netherlands and Italian,
we have shown how this
self-regulation is actually
you know,
one big failure
you know, from the side of
what we need to see,
from the side of
the citizens, users,
but also from the side of
the European Commission
because if we have a look
at the five pillars
of the self-regulatory
Code of Practice
against disinformation, you know,
we were looking particularly
in three of them, you know,
Users and government, you know,
sharing the data
and Eliška spoke about it briefly,
nevertheless, so the ads libraries
we have seen
on all three levels basically
insufficient, you know,
huge variety in the platforms,
you know,
some taking it rather seriously,
some not at all
so really huge huge differences
between the platforms
and also on different levels
as well
So
So here the Commission is
proposing to move on
from the principle of
self-regulation
into more of a co-regulatory approach
in which the Commission
and the EU in general
will be turning the table,
you know,
and really positioning itself
in the middle of the debate
and really saying quite clearly,
you know,
what we need from the platforms
in terms of, for example,
information about microtargeting
which is quite
the Action Plan is heavy on this
Again, on the digital political
advertising you know,
how we need to be informed,
you know,
how the report should be looking,
what kind of set of data
there should be
and so and so forth.
So this is again quite locant,
you know,
and the right step
in the right direction.
So this is important as well
and also,
and here I would jump to the third
kind of level of the whole debate
This is the very
significant recognition
of the added value from
the civil society,
from academia
but also from journalists
and the media community
that the Commission itself
cannot do it alone
Obviously there are also
member states
that have a very important
role to play
in this debate, you know,
especially when we speak about
elections and electoral processes,
you can be only self-regulating
the EU elections
which is, you know, in
the European Parliament indeed
but obviously we need to do much more
also on the national level
and here the Commission is
once again pushing for
multi state ward approach
and really doing much
more together,
so that is why I believe
that we are going
in the right direction
I still see that there are
some weak spots,
you know, weak blind spots
in the debate, you know
We have seen quite little to be,
you know,
The language on digital advertising,
for example,
is in general going
in the right direction,
Europe also recognised in the
freedom of speech, you know,
and also obviously
digital transparency
these are the two big
approaches that
the Commission has decided to take
This is very good
but we still see rather
vague language, you know,
we are so much waiting for
the Digital Services Act
that needs to be interacting
with each other
So this will be significant,
you know.
We will see more in two weeks time
as was mentioned as well
So the Commission and the Action
Plan has already hinted on
on the division of levels a little bit,
you know,
there is a little bit of, you know,
in the text that
that DSA should be more
horizontal you know,
it should filtering out
illegal content
but also stating the
rules of the game
to secure the level
playing field indeed
and the Action Plan for Democracy
should be especially going after
the harmful content,
you know,
such as the area
of disinformation
that I’ve already spoken about
but still this is to be seen,
you know,
and we need to be very vocal that
about
that  there should be a clear
division of labour
and none of the chosen sides should be
really forgettable
One last thing that I’ve already said
during the video recording yesterday
that I was preparing
was that one last weak spot
of the Action Plan is
the wider issue of civil society
in the EU,
this is going beyond the digital space
in the EU
this is also about part
of the debate,
because we need both
the recognition that
the same is for journalists
and media,
which are pressured
and then their information
has done an excellent job
to recognise the fret, you know,
and the problem
but the same is actually
being faced by the society,
there is middle on the civic space
for civil society
or on how the Commission will be
interacting with the civil society
offline,
you know
in the wide sense,
you know,
in the future.
So happy to elaborate on some of
these points, you know,
these are some of my brief remarks,
you know,
on the Action Plan for Democracy
there is indeed much more
to be discussed, you know,
I’ve barely touched upon
the elections sphere
or the area of media
but there is a really substantial
part on that as well
so I highly recommend to
have a look at this,
it’s interesting reading,
in many respects really innovative
and going into the right direction
Thank you
Thank you Pavel for your description
or the remarks of the European
Democracy Action Plan
and finally to cover all crucial
pieces of this legislation
I would also like to turn to George.
I know that you are maybe not
an insider that much
on like specific pieces of
European legislation.
On the other hand,
I would like to ask you if there are
like some core principles
that you think that the EU should put
into its horizontal AI regulation
that is upcoming in March?
Like maybe two or three principles
for good AI regulation,
if you will.
So I’m working with a number of
governments worldwide
and I can see some level of
cross-pollination already happening
in some of the aspects and
some of the European values
that they are actually permeating this
kinds of new pieces of legislation
I’m kind of familiar with
the latest proposal
that came out from the Parliament
that is trying to address risk,
which is probably the most
fundamental part of-
I see it as a good approach
to approaching AI
and I’m seeing the US Federal Government
going in a similar direction
without going broad enough,
I would say.
So the initiatives that I’m part of
in the US
are mostly focusing on the government
uses of these technologies
but finally the ethical and
risk-based principles
are becoming central
to what kind of technologies they will
acquire for government purposes
and what are the technologies
that they can develop in house
which is, by the way, the majority of
US Federal Government use cases
What I’m also seeing is that
I'm, you know,
my headquarters are in California
and I’m seeing a very direct effect
on European legislation,
and also partially UK legislation.
In matters of privacy
and the general approach to data,
I’m seeing a number of proposals that
are kind of being blocked
in the Senate
because of the standoff
we had during the previous,
I mean the current administration
and not the upcoming administration
in the US that
that are very much influenced
by a European way of thinking
especially political advertising
so just the pieces you have
been talking about
and fighting disinformation.
I happen to be,
I’m a double citizen
and it gives me the luxury of
being European-minded
in certain things
and US-minded in other things
but I very much welcome your focus
that I’ve experienced so far in
this session on disinformation.
I’m very European in that regard.
I think that disinformation is
probably the biggest issue
that we have currently
in the realm of AI
and it attacks the social fabric
very very directly,
so I see it as the biggest danger
of our times.
And sometimes I’m as much of
a headliner
that I’m saying that disinformation
should be regulated similarly
as nuclear technology is,
so that may sound
a little bit radical.
So I think that the principles
and the approaches
that I’m seeing in upcoming
European legislations
in this general Artificial
Intelligence framework
are good ones.
Of course the proof is
in the pudding,
as so often with anything
that comes out
from the Commission
or the Parliament
because I see that the
risk-based approach
and establishing a
liability framework
is something that has been very much
missing from the equation so far.
We have spent
and I think Europe has spent
a lot of time,
probably I would even say
too much time,
on principles
so when you’re actually thinking me
about principles
I’m saying that I’m
personally aware of
280 AI ethics principles documents
in the world,
and of course the one that came out
of Europe is a very influential one
but there are 280,
and they’ve spent 3 years
on these principles
while these systems are being deployed
and while they are already at work.
So you may or may not know that
there are some very high risk cases
in the US right now.
For example, the US parole system
is actually managed by an AI
decision support systems,
like 30% of US parole systems is
already done by machines.
My worry going forward
that is not very much publicised
in the media yet
is that
especially when we are using
AI technologies
on decision support systems,
we can easily face a situation
when people who want to
relinquish responsibility
they will be pushing these decisions
onto the machines
and not act as the human in the loop
that they should be.
So I see it as a very direct
psychological danger
and if you are looking at
some of the studies
that came out of the JRC recently
about government uses of AI
in the public sector
there are already a few cases,
I think there was one
in Poland recently
where with a government
welfare support system,
99% of AI decisions have
not been overruled
by, you know, the public servant
who was in charge of that,
which may of course mean that
the system was very good,
but in my humbled opinion,
it actually may mean that people
are relinquishing their obligation
on acting as the human
in the loop.
So generally I think it’s gonna
serve as a model.
I know many governments who are
very keenly watching
whatever is arising
out of Europe in that regard
and I personally think that
the European values
have to permeate, you know,
friendly governments
or the thinking of friendly
governments
or aligned governments
in the world
because in general they are heading
in the right direction,
of course they are too much
regulation-minded
and I would,
you know,
sometimes comment on the stifling
innovation aspect of it
when I’m very in my American hat
but by and large they are
very much important
and they are heading
in the right direction.
Thank you George.
You actually took us right
into the second topic
of this panel
because after having described
all these crucial
pieces of legislation,
I would like to focus on
some more overarching topics
such as the European digital regulation
from the global perspective.
Maybe I would turn to Eliška
and ask her
about this EU influence
on global regulation
because we actually know that
the EU is not exactly
a digital innovation powerhouse
when it is compared to
the US or China
and if it can nevertheless set
some global standards
on digital regulation.
Hi
Thank you
I would actually argue with you
a little there
that if Europe does something
really well
it's setting the standards
for regulating.
It’s not only the European Union
legislation
that even if I step back
a few years,
I think it was 2017 or 2018,
when NetzDG in Germany,
the first "anti hate speech" wall
in the world actually was adopted.
We saw the use of similar walls
suddenly popping up
around the globe
for better or worse
because when we regulate
content specifically
that’s always very much connected to
a level of democratic discourse
and what is actually the level
of rule of law
and how it’s being upheld
by the country in question.
We saw a huge impact
that GDPR actually has
which was the first kind of
flagship law of the European Union
that puts users fundamental rights
at the centre
and started protecting
their personal data.
There is a lot to discuss about
the enforcement of this law
and what to anticipate
in the future,
but that was definitely
a huge game changer
that inspired many legislations
and legislators also
around the world.
We as an organisation operate
also in Latin America,
we saw responses and similar laws
being proposed
in Latin America
in several different countries
and also other parts
of the world
and when we discuss
the United States
and what kind of impact potentially
the upcoming DSA and DMA
can have
in terms of intermedia reliability,
for instance,
the section 230 of the
Communication Decency Act
is being subjected to legal review.
I’m now not referring to what
President Trump would like to do
to the section 230.
Of course, under this
Trump administration
this section should
never be reopened
but there are also voices
from any minority rights
organisations
and many other movements
where blanket immunity
and then again we can discuss
whether that has ever been
the intention of section 230
or whether this is the way how
courts interpreted the same high power
put under the section 230.
But it resolved to some extent these
blanket immunity for platforms
though within of illegal content
and illegal activities online
often cannot actually seek
satisfactory remedy or protection
that they would deserve in
that particular context.
There are several proposals now
coming up in the States
for instance, PACT Act
that we do follow quite closely
and our Washington team has followed
that proposal quite closely
and even had a chance to actually
submit formal comments on PACT Act
during this consultation period
and it was quite interesting
for me to see
how many measures were actually just
taken from the European context,
from 24 hours time frame
for removal of the content
to ideas around notice
and actions procedures
and how there are like this very niche
content governance legal aspects
that European laws usually do
or intend to keep.
So the impact is enormous.
There is of course India
and their guidelines on
intermedia reliability
and interestingly, we often see
these measures
that we criticise in Europe,
also spreading globally,
so the legal naturally again
contributes to more oppression
and, you know, unjustifiable
restrictions on fundamental rights
and not only freedom of expression
because especially when it comes to
something we call potentially
harmful content
which by the way should
just be outside
of the scope of future
DSA framework,
and we can discuss that later on,
and in the European understanding,
this information actually folds
into that scope,
but there are other ways
how DSA can tackle that
whether through proper meaningful
transparency safeguard accountability
and eventually interoperability
which has already been mentioned here,
even though I think it also needs
to be underlined
that we are very much
at the beginning,
so what was published now
in terms of the European
Democracy Action Plan,
that was just the communication
that outlines
what EDAP is actually meant
to be about,
but we haven't seen yet
any concrete measures,
that all will unfold
throughout the years
and DSA and DMA
even when the drafts will
come out on the 15th,
it will take us another 2-3-4 years
or even more
depending on how optimistic
or how pessimistic you are.
We all remember how long
we negotiated GDPR.
So everything we're saying right now
it’s still at the level
of speculation
and we can only hope for the best,
but there are other measures
the EU can actually tackle
the spread of disinformation and
the machine learning systems
and amplification of potentially
harmful content,
so not only how the content
is being moderated,
but how it’s being distributed,
that’s the key departing point
that we should all see
and recognise
and that’s the way how we can
then actually arrive
to some sustainable solutions
to disinformation
or even online hate speech
and that again bring us to the
whole issue of microtargeting
that has already been mentioned
or online targeting,
behavioural ads,
ads tech,
there are so many terms
and they often conflate
or are being conflated
in this debate.
We know that European
Parliament called
for a ban on online targeting
in one of its reports on DSA
and all of this will need to be
unpacked and unbundled
and the same applies, for instance,
to interoperability,
great idea,
but we need to really know
what and who we are actually
making interoperable
and this is something Europe
will need to figure out
because the world is watching,
that’s the thing,
Europe does have an impact
and power over regulation globally
and we can cause a lot of mess
in some parts of the world
if we don’t get this right,
so there is a lot
at stake here.
Thank you Eliška
for putting our discussion
into this global perspective.
Also Pavel wanted to react
on this topic
of the global influence
of EU digital regulations,
so please.
Thank you so much Klara.
I would only repeat Eliška’s words
for most of the things
but especially I think what
we should be really proud of
is that we are really like shaping
world things, I think.
Here once again the Action Plan
for Democracy
it can be really an opportunity
for doing that thing in the future
as well you know.
GDPR, it was already mentioned,
this was one of the successful cases,
you know,
which is being studied or
was studied at the time
in the United States,
they are very much following
those trends
that was mentioned previously
and I think we are also
so much lucky, you know,
we are now sitting,
ourselves at least,
in the centre of Europe,
in Czechia,
in Slovakia
and from our perspective,
we can be only very grateful
for the EU to do all of this work,
because otherwise we will not be
able at all to shape this agenda.
I would just compare that
with countries,
with our neighbours, you know,
from the East, you know,
Ukraine, Georgia,
but also the Western Balkan
countries, you know,
which are only desiring to have
something like, you know,
online libraries, you know,
an actual law for digital
political advertising, you know.
We are very critical,
you know,
we are so much critical
about this that, you know,
the information there are
just, you know,
not really telling that
the ranges are too big,
you know
and the third parties are playing,
having a role
and we are not monitoring them enough
and so on and so forth,
but East countries are
desperately wanting
at least to have this,
you know,
and there Facebook,
Twitter, Google
are just not delivering that
at all
So what we should be doing
and here I see a huge opportunity
especially after January 21st,
you know, next year
that there’ll be so much more
of common work
from the side of the EU with
our US counterparts on this
because the big part of the gate
is actually lying on
the US table,
as George mentioned,
so only through this interaction
we can be really pushing
the platforms to develop,
to deliver not only
in our own continuance,
but also global,
you know.
So here I see one big
opportunity as well
so I just wanted to add that
to our debate.
Thank you so much
Thank you Pavel
Quickly, I would turn back to George
because I think also in this like,
when we have discussions
about EU digital regulation,
critics would often say that
there is too much regulation
and that it's making actually
the EU digital companies
uncompetitive
compared to their global
competitors.
So I would like to ask you,
do you think that AI
which is respectful of human rights
and freedoms,
if it can be actually competitive
in the world
and maybe not just focus on the AI
but general like European-based
digital technologies
that are actually upholding
some standards.
In the long run, yes.
In the short run, not that much.
I mean, let’s face our hard facts
about, you know,
where European companies stand
in the global rankings
and you can talk AI,
you can talk digital.
I think that
the current European innovation
funding structure
and a lot of the decision-making
processes
and the
Some of focuses are not
in the right place.
I mean, that’s ages old debate,
or I would say statement
that Europe has double
innovation deficit
and somehow the money
that is poured into
technology and AI
is not really visible,
it doesn’t commercialise well,
it doesn't take Europe and
European companies to the ranks.
So if you wanna be cynical,
you could say that,
you know,
the same old adage of
"If all you have is a hammer,
everything looks like a nail."
If you don't have your own
technological advantage,
then you regulate other people
or foreign actors.
And
It has certain advantages
because I still very much believe
that Europe’s heart is
in the right place
But I would definitely
push the European institutions
and governments
in the direction
that is actually crafting
the European model of AI
and there is a lot of talk,
you know, lately
about sovereign IT
in the new Commission
and I think it's also
very much important
because Europe is between
a rock and a hard place
meaning the US and China
as data monopolies
and they have monopolies,
so sovereignty is crucial
but I think that
that definitely there
I think there should be
a lot of regulation,
it can very much become
a purely legal battle brand
when the companies
who own AI
will try to label their
technologies as not AI
and just, you know, it fails
to fulfil its purpose
What does regulation need
to fail or fulfill its purpose?
So now I’m putting on my,
you know, American hat,
I think that Europe has to
understand these laws of AI
like, you know,
how much it needs
concentration of resources,
how much it needs, you know,
national laboratories,
how much it needs investment
into new kinds of research
that is maybe going beyond
the boundaries
of where AI is at right now
in this machine learning age
where we are.
So there are a lot of factors
that I don't think permeated the minds
of European legislators yet
and instead of doing,
they are regulating
and they should be doing
a lot more of the doing
to be actually competitive.
The second thing that
I have observed
in my, you know, double hats
is that
whenever European institutions are
coming to visit Silicon Valley
they are in this double
psychological state of like,
on the one hand, they are admiring
a lot of the things
that are there
and the innovating thinking there,
but on the other hand,
they are kind on enemy ground.
I think there is a lot of
a lot of obsession
with these big technology
companies
and the purpose of regulation
or the real purpose behind
is, you know,
how to regulate this companies
and I'm not trying to defend them.
What I'm trying to be is realistic
that these are companies
who own AI,
they have to be,
you know, at the table,
they have to be used
for the right purpose
of influencing legislation,
and I’m not meaning lobbying here
but coming up with
technological solutions
to the problems
that the Commission
or the European institutions
are stating.
Let me give you one example of that.
A few months ago,
I was part of a
direct conversation between
one the big social media companies
and the Commission
and the Parliament
and the biggest learning
for me was that
these companies who are doing
AI research
that is not being publicly known,
simply, the technological approach
does not really exist
inside the European institutions
and these companies are
the only ones
who can actually supply
the solution to the problem
they have caused
because that kind of thinking
doesn’t exist,
that kind of deep level
understanding doesn’t exist.
So all in all what I wanted
to say is that
I really believe in that
these big companies
should be made responsible
for creating public interest
technology,
so basically because a lot of
the problems are
very much business model-based,
the European institutions should urge
a different way of thinking
and put legislation
in this direction,
or regulation in the direction
of emphasising the need of creating
public interest technology's texts
and only these companies
can develop
these, you know, public interest
technology’s texts
to make it viable.
So I see a lot more involvement
and engagement possible
is that of like,
you know,
what currently is,
which is frankly
trench warfare.
Yeah
Thank you George
I think it also quite nicely
touched upon
what Pavel said about self-regulation
and if it is an actually viable
approach at all
Now we are quite approaching
the end,
but I still would like to ask
one question to Marcel.
Also, if you would like to
send us a question
now would be the time to do that.
Anyways,
Marcel, you being the representative
of the European institutions here,
do you think
that the European Union should strive
for some more like digital
sovereignty in the future?
As it has been the trend
or at least, it has been
the buzzword
of the past couple of years
or if it should try to cooperate
with some other global actors
maybe including the US,
given that now there is going to be
maybe a more favorable situation
for actual transatlantic relations?
The floor is yours.
Yeah, thanks
If you allow me,
before I answer that question,
because a lot has been said
in the meantime,
I would also like to share
a couple thoughts from my side
on disinformation and
on artificial intelligence.
When it comes to disinformation,
I just wanted to stress that
that’s basically not a new issue, right?
Disinformation has been with us
since ever
but
the distribution channels
have changed
and their effectivity
has changed
And
it's
it’s also
I think it needs to be stressed that
that the ultimate resolution to
the problem of disinformation
is improving media literacy,
it’s to teach critical thinking
but the problem is that
of course this is a long term process
and in the meantime, we need to
also take some steps
in order not to let
our own society
be destroyed.
And one of the biggest issues
with disinformation is
these information bubbles
which basically only people
who work closely
with the technology,
either on the technology level
or on legislation level
realised that they actually exist
and what harm it does
to the society
and in that sense
we need to have more
algorithm transparency.
With all these large platforms
where they are gatekeepers
to information
and in your social network feed
you have
you have a feed of posts
and you don’t even know why
is that you are reading exactly this
then it’s very difficult to fight
disinformation bubbles
and the rabbit hole is just, you know,
deeper and deeper as you go,
so we definitely need more
algorithm transparency
and we need to have the
possibility to opt out
from this prioritisation
of articles or posts,
and
or users even should be able to
supply with their own way
how they want to prioritise
the posts on their feed
and the second connected
with that is
you know,
we cannot let just these platforms
and all the advertising ecosystem
to be incentivised by
destroying our society
which means
that we really need to target
microtargeting and
behavioral advertising
which I believe should be banned.
I also believe that
it is already very problematic
from the point of view of GDPR
and maybe we’ll see
something in the coming months
on that side
because as much as I’m aware of
there is a
there’s a strategic litigation,
you know,
that basically puts this
behavioral advertising
against, you know,
the purpose limitation
that is in GDPR
which seems to be really problematic.
Now
with AI,
I just wanted to say
because there was one information,
one piece of information
if I really receive it correctly
from George
it was that 30% of paroles are
decided by AI in the US,
if that is correct,
that, you know, looks
really horrible to me
because
well, as a matter of fact
I was an opinion reporter
for a report on AI used by
the police and judicial authorities
and criminal matters
in the European Parliament
and, you know, one of the issues
that we have been having
So this is a topic that is very,
you know, close to my heart
but one of the issues that
we’ve been having
is that
if we let AI to decide
then we are not building
human centric technologies,
we’re not building a technology
that helps us make decisions
but make decisions on their own
on our behalf
and not necessarily
the best decision
and it also very much,
you know,
leads to
deepening biases in the society.
Imagine that you have an AI system
that decides where the police
should deploy more forces
because there is maybe more needed
according to the statistics
but then of course you are
going to send them
in the
in areas where
you will subsequently discover
maybe more crime
because you would have had
more police officers there
and then you will send even
more police officers
according to that decision,
so this is the problem that we face
and I believe that we need
a risk-based approach
as the Commission proposes
but we don’t need just two levels,
like a low risk and a high risk
but we need a whole range
of different risks
and some technologies should
also be banned
for being like super high risk
like facial recognition
in public spaces
because that’s very risky.
Now back to your question
on digital sovereignty.
Well, I don't think that these
two options that you presented
are necessarily
completely
you know,
something that cannot, you know,
work together
because
because I believe that
yeah, we should on one hand
become more sovereign
in the digital area.
We need to take back control
of technology on one hand,
but also I believe that we need
to be more cooperative
especially with the US
and we should also set clear
rules on technology
that, you know, cannot
clear lines that cannot be crossed
and by that we want also to
set the standard globally
and here I agree with Eliška,
that Europe has been doing
a really good job in this.
If you look in the past,
I don't know how about you
but my feeling is that
if it’s not clearly a regulation
that goes clearly
in favour of business,
it’s usually Europe that takes
the first step forward
and the GDPR is the best example
probably we have at hand
at this moment
and I believe that we will see,
you know, this GDPR principles
being followed by the rest
of the world very soon.
Thank you Marcel.
Unfortunately, our one hour is up.
I can see that this was
a very packed panel,
we actually touched upon
so many issues
that I think would deserve
like a discussion on their own,
so unfortunately, we didn't
unpack everything
that I would imagine we could
Just at the end,
I would like to share with you
these results of the panel
that we made at the beginning.
It was actually before this discussion
so we can’t really measure like
if these stances have changed
since then.
Nevertheless,
to the question if the online platforms
should be like the only ones
or if we can trust
the online platforms
to regulate themselves.
Most people,
like the vast majority of people,
answered “No”,
so that is quite an important call
for some digital regulation
from the part of the EU or States.
And regarding our second question
I'm sorry I have it on
my small phone here
Most people said
that the digital regulation
should primarily make sure
that content policing is transparent,
available for public scrutiny
and possible to appeal,
which I think it’s quite in line with
what you have been saying all along.
Also, our viewers have said that
that it should only target
strictly illegal content
on very large platforms,
but also some say that it should
actually be on all platforms
but only the illegal content
which, of course, is not
disinformation, for instance.
With this I have to thank you very much
for your participation
and I would like to thank
George Tilesch,
Eliška Pirková,
Marcel Kolaja,
Pavel Havlíček
I’m very much looking forward to
speaking with you again
and
maybe we will have a longer
discussion that time.
Goodbye and have a nice day
Regards from Brussels, bye
Bye-bye, take care.
Thank you very much, bye-bye